Many call it “the revolution”, but for the victims this year marks the 50th anniversary of the mass murder of Zanzibar’s Arabs and Indians by the black majority. This 1964 event was labelled by some historians a “genocide” for the deliberate targeting
of specific communities which is said to have claimed up to 20,000 lives, left
26,000 imprisoned and 100,000 exiled. 
Despite this, it has been poorly documented and probably forgotten in African history because it affected mostly non-black African populations.  The genocide took place on the back of the 1964 Zanzibar revolution to overthrow the  monarchy ruled by Sultan Jamshid bin
Abdullah. There had already been tension on the island between ethnic groups. The 1960s population of the island had a tremendously cultural heritage with extensive diversity - trade from Africa, Asia, and the Middle East had converged on the islands, bringing with it a multitude of influences. The island had about 600 Europeans, 50,000 Arabs and 20,000 Asians from the Indian subcontinent. Even though at independence Arabs constituted under 20% of Zanzibar’s population, they were economically and politically dominant.  ‘Field Marshal’ John Okello When the British
granted Zanzibar independence in 1963, an election followed in which the Afro-Shirazi
Party (ASP) ran against the Sultan’s Zanzibar Nationalist Party (ZNP) and the ZNP
won with 54% of the popular vote. This compounded feelings of resentment within the black population that led to the fast uprising. Historian Jonathon Glassman described it as a purely “racial revolution” to empower the African majority. “It was a unique manifestation of racial violence between self-identified Africans and Arabs in post-colonial Africa, in that Arabs and not Africans were the primary victims.” The coup was said to have been led by self-appointed field marshal John Okello, who was able to draw on pre-existing racial animosity for support. A Ugandan by birth who believed that he was divinely chosen by God to remove Arabs from power, in his biography “Revolution in
Zanzibar”, Okello recounted his speeches made in public areas. It was clear that
he intended to remove Arab presence in Zanzibar through violence with
statements such as: “therefore my brethren, we must get them out of the Island
by guns and knives”.  On January 12, 1964, with popular support from the Island’s
oppressed African majority, Okello and 600-800 fellow revolutionaries fought
their way to the capital of Zanzibar, Stone Town, where the Sultan of Zanzibar
lived, and took power. Even though the revolution took a mere matter of hours, spontaneous violence spread and continued for days. Okello and his “death machine” worked their way through the islands of Zanzibar, murdering and plundering the country’s Arab and Asian population, adding weight to his  threats of publicly executing any opposition, which included a promise to burn ZNP supporters alive. This footage from Italian documentary “Africa Addio” by Gualtiero Jacopetti’s, is the only
existing such documentation of what happened between January 18-20 1964. It shows a
line of prisoners being led to mass gravesites, open mass graves, entire
villages that were destroyed and trucks filled with corpses.   The Omani Arabs For over a thousand years, the East African islands were settled
by Arab traders who were displaced by the Portuguese in 1503 but reinstated
when, in 1698, Omani Arabs captured Fort Jesus in Mombasa, Kenya. Up until this time African and Arab populations were said to
have lived in “peaceful co-existence”, that is until the introduction of Omani
Arab rule, which helped turn Zanzibar into an epicentre of the East African
slave trade.  Some authors argue that the British rule created a system of
“divide and rule” that exacerbated pre-existing divides between African and
Arab populations. The tensions were already clear when in 1961, in preparation
for independence of the country, Zanzibar held elections that led to rioting. Arabs and Africans
attacked each other at polling places and “many groups of Africans ambushed the areas inhabited by Arabs in Zanzibar island” in an “orgy of killing and blood letting”. The 1964 revolution ended up meaning very different things
for the different communities living in Zanzibar. The Arabs that fled would
describe the revolution as “genocide”, while the native African populations would
either describe it as an independence movement though others would argue this
was never realised since they perceive their sovereignty was hindered by Abeid Karume,
the first President of Zanzibar, who negotiated a merger of Zanzibar with
Tanganyika to form the new nation of Tanzania.