DAY two of the US-Africa summit concluded with a lavish White House dinner hosted by
Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama, with soul legend Lionel Richie providing
the entertainment. If Lionel Richie had to write lyrics based on the story of which African
presidents showed up, which ones didn’t, which ones weren’t invited, how those
who were in town arrived, and what the First Ladies got up to, he would have
portrayed a fascinating microcosm of the African reality. Here are the off-beat
stories that the TV report you were watching didn’t bring you: THOSE WHO GOT THE DEAR JOHN LETTER Four
presidents weren’t invited. 
There’s Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, at 94; he’s ruled
for 34 years and fiddled at least two elections. The Obama administration was
one of the Western governments that refused to recognise Mugabe’s re-election
in July 2013, which the opposition said was rigged. Sudan’s Bashir had sour
grapes to offer, calling the summit “unusual”. Eritrea’s Isaias Aferweki was
not invited because the U.N. continues to sanction Eritrea for its alleged role
in continuing to destabilise Somalia, but also Eritrea has not accepted
diplomatic relations with the United States, rejecting America’s offer of an
ambassador. And nothing arrived in the post for Central African Republic’s
(CAR) Catherine Samba-Panza either, apparently because her country has been
suspended by the African Union over sectarian violence which has killed more
than 2,500 and seen a million people displaced—about a quarter of the country’s
total population. THE RSVP
CLASS Liberia’s Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf’s and Sierra Leone’s Ernest Bai Koroma got cards, but
sent RSVP’s because of an Ebola outbreak back home. There were probably a lot
of Ebola-phobic Americans and African presidents who were happy that they
didn’t come. This wave of Ebola has killed over 900 people in the two countries,
so Johnson’s and Koroma’s absence only helped demonstrate the persisting problem of
disease in Africa.  THE
POLYGAMISTS’ DICE Beside
showing up, several presidents had to make difficult choices about which of
their many wives to bring, including King Mswati of Swaziland, with 15 to
choose from; South Africa’s Jacob Zuma with four, and Gambia’s Yahya Jammeh
with two. Jammeh, who likes to play the nation’s First Healer after concocting
an alleged AIDS miracle cure in the State House kitchen sink, is shown in a
photo with a magnificent walking stick. Jammeh might have some “magic” after
all. He got the stick, which is big enough to beat down both Obama and
Michelle, through Secret Service security and to a photo op with the American
First Couple. PUBLIC
DISPLAYS OF AFFECTION (PDA) Africa’s
presidents don’t like public displays of affection, if the photos of the
African leaders and the Obama’s are anything to go by. The exception seems to
be Mauritania’s president Mohamed Abdel Aziz who in a photo with is clasping
his wife’s hand. All the other African leaders stand stoically side-by-side
with their wives—or, like in the case of Guinea-Bissau’s president and First
lady, they stand nearly a foot apart.  THE UNACCOMPANIED BOYS Most
African leaders attended the summit with their wives, with the exception of a
few, including those from Kenya, Nigeria, South Sudan, Libya and DR Congo—
which are all currently facing some kind of conflict or terror-related
insecurity at home. Coincidence…or not? FASHION POLICE - BEST
DRESSED Africa
isn’t all flowing robes and agbadas.
Sierra Leone’s minister of foreign affairs gets the best-dressed award, looking very jazzy
in his bowtie. The best dressed couple is a tough one to call, but Idris Deby
of Chad and his wife Hinda take that one. LOVE FROM
THE FANS The White
House has gone out of its way to insist that the US is dealing with Africa as
“partners”. But obviously, some African leaders are rank-and-file members of
the Obama fan club, going out of their way to clasp Obama’s hand like they just
won a lottery—such as Burundi’s president Pierre Nkurunziza and surprisingly,
Gambia’s Yahya Jammeh, who (ironically) likes to go into tirades about how
much he hates the West. Michelle, too, gets lots of love from African First Ladies,
particularly South Africa’s Nompumelelo Primrose Zuma, who looks positively
overjoyed to be photographed  with
Michelle. FIRST DAUGHTERS, HEIGHT, AND BARACK’S BEND The
summit’s theme is “Investing in the Future”, and one president who has kept
with the theme is Rwanda’s Paul Kagame, who was accompanied by his daughter
Ange Kagame. Rwanda’s president is already 6’2”, but his daughter Ange is even
taller than he is. Height like that runs the risk of looking a little gangly or
awkward, but in a striking photograph with her father, Obama and Michelle, Ange
skillfully complemented her height by wearing a long ivory gown. Interestingly,
most of Africa’s presidents are shorter than Obama—the average height of
American men is about 5’10”. Data on height in Africa is more scanty to come
by, though sources show it can be from 5’4 ½” in Nigeria to 5’6 ½ in South
Africa. Obama, ever the slick politician, stoops ever so slightly in each photo
where a president is shorter than he is. Algeria: Prime Minister Abdelmalek Sellal and Farida Sellal   Angola: Vice President Manuel Domingos Vincente  Benin: President Boni Yayi  Botswana: Phandu Skelemani, Minister of Foreign Affairs   Burkina Faso: President Blaise Compaoré and Chantal Compaoré   Burundi: President Pierre Nkurunziza and Denise Bucumi   Cameroon: President Paul Biya and Chantal Biya   Cape Verde: President Jorge Carlos de Almeida Fonseca and Liga Arcangela Lubrino  Chad: President Idriss Deby Itno and Hinda Deby Itno  Comoros: President Ilkililou Dhoinine and Hadididja Abubakar Ilkililou Dhoinine  Republic of Congo: President Denis Sassou N’Guesso  Cote d’Ivoire: Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan  Djibouti: President Ismail Omar Guelleh  Democratic Republic of Congo: President Joseph Kabila   Egypt: Prime Minister Ibrahim Roshdy Mahlab   Gabon: President Ali Bongo Ondimba and Sylvia Bongo Ondimba   Ghana: President John Dramani Mahama and Lordina Mahama   Guinea: President Alpha Conde and Djene Kaba Conde   Guinea Bissau: President José Mário Vaz and Rosa Vaz  Rwanda: President Paul Kagame and Ange Kagame (daughter)   Kenya: President Uhuru Kenyatta   Libya: Prime Minister Abdalla Alteni   Liberia: Senior Vice President Joseph Nyuma Boakai   Madagascar: President Hery Rajaonarimampianina and Voahanagy Rajaonarimampianina   Malawi: President Arthur Peter Mutharika and Gertrude Mutharika   Mali: President Ibrahim Keita and Keita Aminata Maiga  Mauritania: President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz and Mariam Mint Ahmed Dit Tekber  Morocco: Head of Government Abdel-llah Benkiran and Nabila Benkiran  Mozambique: President Armando Guebuza and Maria da Luz Guebuza  Niger: President Issoufou Mahamadou  Nigeria: President Goodluck Jonathan   Senegal: President Macky Sall and Marieme Faye Sall  Seychelles: President James Alix Michel   Sierra Leone: Samura Wilson Kamara, Minister of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation  Somalia: President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and Qamar Ali Omar   South Africa: President Jacob Zuma and Nompumelelo Primrose Zuma  South Sudan: President Salva Kiir  Swaziland: King Mswati III and Inkhosikati La Mbikiza   Tanzania: President Jakaye Kikwete and Salma Kikwete   Equatorial Guinea: President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and Constancia Mangue  Gambia: President Yahya Jammeh and Zineb Jammeh   Togo: President Faure Gnassingbé  Tunisia: President Mohamed Marzouki   Zambia: Vice President Guy Scott and Charlotte Harland Scott   Uganda: Yoweri Museveni  Ethiopia: Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn and Roman Tesfaye   Lesotho: Prime Minister Motsoahae Thabane   Namibia: President Hifikepuny Pohamba and Penehupifo Pohamba   Sao Tome and Principe: Prime Minster Gabriel Arcanjo Ferreira da Costa  Mauritius: Prime Minister Navinchandra Ramgoolam  Read the body language, make your call, and comment on the site or email us at editorial@mgafrica.com