AFTER our story to mark Ethiopia’s New Year last week (As Ethiopia celebrates 2007, 17 delightful facts about this hardy nation that sets it apart) comments poured in, requesting that the tale should not end. That more striking facts needed to be highlighted. 
Here we go: 1. Rwanda genocide alarm: Many commentators have noted the close links between the ruling parties in Rwanda and Ethiopia. Few know that it has its roots in a little publicised fact - Ethiopia was the first country call up the international community to take action to stop the 1994 Rwanda genocide. 2. First Church: Ethiopia was the first country to build a Christian church on African soil. Christianity crossed the border in the 4th Century AD during the time of the Axumite kingdom. 3. Wheat production: Ethiopia is the largest wheat producer in sub-Saharan Africa with  cultivated land of 1.1 million hectares. 4. Islamic roots:  Ethiopia is the site of one of Africa first world’s islamic communities - Negash, in the Kingdom of Axum. Muslims first arrived there in 615 AD as refugees and settled. 5. Barefoot winners: In 1960 Abebe Bikila won the Olympic marathon, attracting the world’s attention for being the first East African to win a medal and also because he ran the event barefoot. 6. Airline: Home to Africa’s oldest airline - Ethiopia Airlines. Serving 57 international destinations, with 34 in Africa, six in Asia, 10 in the Middle East and seven in Europe and America, the carrier flies to more destinations in Africa than any other airline. 7. Non-oil economy: Ethiopia is the fastest growing non-oil economy in Africa, with growth of about 10% per annum over the last ten years. 8. Female pilot: Ethiopian Captain Aster Tolossa is thought to be the first female pilot in the world to have shot down an enemy aircraft in air to air combat. 9. Liquid gold: Ethiopia is Africa’s largest producer of honey and the fourth largest producer of beeswax in the world. Honey production currently stands at 50,000 metric tons per annum, producing approximately 23.6% and 2.1% of total African and world honey respectively. 10. Ethiopian wolf: Home to the most threatened candid in the entire world (less than 500 left) and the only wolf species found in Africa - the Ethiopian wolf. 11. Many millions: Ethiopia is creating millionaires at a faster rate than any other country on the continent. The number of dollar millionaires in the east African nation rose from 1,300 in 2007 to 2,700 in 2013.